Good afternoon, everyone.
Familiar faces in the back there?
Regulars at, uh, petitions committee.
Now we what we'd like to see. Alright, thank you.
Um, now Mr. Palmer, we do have
echo solve it.
Well just while we're doing that, um,
we can probably introduce ourselves with Echo, um,
and then we make sure we fix it up.
So, um, Connor, I chair
of the petitions, city Brown.
Got it. Greg Clearing, uh, national Party
and p for Mongo Garcia, new
National mp. Nice
to meet you talk
Too.
Alright, so, um, Mr.
Palm, we have you for, um, 10 minutes.
So take your petitions, Bert.
Certainly feel free to speak to it, um, the points
and hopefully leave time for questions at the end.
Thank you. Uh, well and, uh, good afternoon.
My name is Simon Palmer
and thank you for the opportunity to talk with you today.
In 2006, our son was born with a rare chromosome condition,
meaning he is fully dependent for every aspect of his life.
I struggle to understand the fairness of the Triple PR Act
that discriminates by imposing an annual audit cost.
Financially disadvantaging only those individuals
whom have a disability.
I'm sure you understand that this cohort are unable
to manage their own affairs and make their own decisions.
They are the most vulnerable individuals in our community.
They need the greatest level of care, support
and protection, most of whom earn the least.
Property managers currently don't have the ability to engage
with an independent auditor
and as a result have no control over the
associated auditing costs.
There are no upper limits to what can be charged.
I therefore don't believe the act is fully
protecting the subject person.
This is potentially exposing these individuals
to exploitation through the charge app model
that is currently being used.
The corporate charge out model that public Trust uses
is well recognized across the corporate
and business sector within New Zealand.
Time and attendance is charged at a rate of $247 per hour
for any portion of a six minute unit.
Detailed on a job sheet I requested from Public Trust
for my son's first audit were six separate six minute units.
One of those units was a phone call I made to public trust
that lasted no more than two minutes
and this calculates out at an actual charge out rate
of $740 per hour.
Uh, likewise there was a six minute allocation for the
generated invoice charge.
It's highly unlikely that this would've taken the
full six minutes.
This model always results in time spent, rounded up
to the nearest six minute unit,
resulting in an actual charge out rate significantly higher
than the $247 per hour rate.
This model does not reflect service cost
or cost, uh, recovery methodology as required to be used
by public organizations
and is generating profit for the public trust
and in turn a dividend to the government.
Any government seeking
to profit from this cohort demonstrates a lack
of understanding and care as a corporate model.
Public trust also deals with overdue payments
noted on an overdue account I received was, please be aware
if this invoice is not paid with them 14 days,
we may have no option
but to take further steps to recover the outstanding debt.
This action may incur collection costs
and could negatively affect your credit rating.
That's my son's credit rating.
Public trust also offer payment plans for those
that can't afford to pay the full amount.
A payment plan for an imposed cost
that the protected person never asked for
and obviously can't afford.
Public trust have advised
that unpaid property manager examination fees have increased
significantly since the subsidy was removed in October, 2024
and sits as of the 31st of January 26 at
$352,000.
This corporate model is well understood
and accepted by the corporate business sector
of New Zealand, however, is not appropriate for this cohort.
This corporate model is exploiting the most
vulnerable individuals.
The model is imposed on low income individuals
that would not otherwise engage with corporate services.
As these services for this income group
are simply unaffordable as the $352,000
of unpaid fees indicate.
There are also some inefficiencies created by lack
of training and support resulting in a cost
to the protected person.
Property managers are moms
and dads, uh, grandparents, other relatives
or friends of the protected person.
Often the property manager is also the welfare guardian.
Most property managers do not come from financial
or business backgrounds
and find the preparation of accounts
for auditing both challenging and stressful.
Limited guidance is available
however, no training is provided.
This results in incorrect information being supplied
to public trust, creating inefficiencies at a significant
cost to the protected person.
There is currently no ongoing support in place
for property managers that may require assistance
with the financial management or preparation documents.
If a property manager needs help, surely they should be able
to go to an organization without the stress
and fear of the protected person being charged.
As I've already mentioned,
the auditing fee discriminates against
those with disabilities.
No individual should be subjected to an imposed cost
because of how they were born.
The Triple PR act not only covers orders
for property managers part four,
but enduring power of attorney part nine.
Under part four, the property manager must file a set
of annual accounts as I do,
and the protected person is charged the associated fee
under part nine, an enduring power of attorney.
There is no obligation
for the person managing the donor's property
to file financial accounts
and subsequently no fees, no audit fees.
This inconsistency is at odds with the intent of the act
to provide protection to the most vulnerable individuals.
It discriminates against a cohort
by once again financially disadvantaging them
through the auditing process and the associated fees
and another co cohort by not providing any protection.
To conclude, there appears to be a true lack
of understanding and care for this cohort
and this supporting communities driven by budget constraints
and during a cost of living crisis.
In October, 2024, the current government
with limited understanding through insufficient consultation
with the disability sector removed the subsidy
that was available to this cohort.
They increased both the asset threshold to 25,000
and the charge out rate to $247 per hour.
Those who now sit below the new $25,000 asset limit
and income thresholds no longer have protection.
The undetected misappropriation of funds
for these individuals would have a significant impact in
long-term ramifications.
Professional advice I received was to spend my son's money
to keep it below the $25,000, uh, limit to avoid the fee.
This is advice I would not give to a non-disabled person,
let alone my own son.
With unpaid fees increasing 250%
over the last 18 months,
these latest settings are clearly not working
and are simply unaffordable.
Speaking from firsthand experience, those who care
for the welfare and finances
of this cohort work incredibly hard for so many.
It's a thankless job.
Day in, day out 24 7, my wife
and I have had to prepare for the death
of our son on many occasions.
He is still very fragile with a short life expectancy,
something we've had to live with for 20 years.
It is an uncertain future
and this uncertainty takes its toll.
There are plenty of others in similar situations to ours.
Daily life for many is stressful, full
of uncertainty and frustrations.
As a country, we have an obligation to support the wellbeing
of those who care for this cohort.
After all, the court appointed them to these roles.
The preparation and submission of financial accounts, along
with the usage of the corporate charge out model
with no support, uh, stresses these caregivers
and property managers do not need
the entire disability sector brings significant value
and something incredibly special to our community.
Those that interact regularly with this cohort learn
and develop traits such as compassion and empathy.
They learn kindness and thoughtfulness
through both actions and words.
They advocate for what is right, all
of which has a positive ripple effect
throughout our communities.
I am aware that some of you are stepping down later this
year and I'm sure
that you have all accomplished much in your
careers in Parliament.
I would ask that you make a positive change
to those in your electorate, electorate
who are unable to vote.
It contribute so positively to the communities they live in
by supporting this petition.
Thank you for your time today.
Uh, I really appreciate this and, uh, some of my thoughts.
Mm.
Alright. Uh, thank you for very good, uh, submissions.
Um, I should declare,
I have a son who's under the triple PR system myself,
so I'm, I'm aware of the, the issues.
Uh, so what's your son's name? Jack. Jack, okay.
Is Jack um, living with you or is he in
Kia? Yes, he's,
he's, uh, still living with us. Alright.
Yep. And his assets, how are they calculated?
His assets? 'cause is is it a percentage?
He, he obviously he has,
he obviously has assets over 25,000, correct?
Yep. So, uh, you know, property, property manager, uh,
bricks and mortar, we don't manage any of that.
Uh, he's not at that stage. He's, he's, he's 20.
Um, but it's, it's just,
it's it's money in the bank effectively.
Yeah. Alright.
Alright. Thank you. Um, other questions? Yeah, so
What, just so I'm clear, so your,
because there were, there was in, in some
of your comments there in terms of the written,
I'm still just trying to get my head around, um, the, the,
uh, the need for the, for the auditing.
Um, am I hearing you say
that you don't think the audit should be required?
Or are you saying that it should be optional?
Uh, I absolutely believe the, the protection comes
through the auditing process.
Okay. So we absolutely, I mean, that, that is the intent
of the Triple PR Act is
to protect the interests of the most vulnerable people.
So we definitely need an auditing process.
Um, and so I'm not advocating to remove that at all.
It's, it's just simply the fee that is associated. Okay.
So you want the audit done auditing to be done,
but you want that, that cost to be born by the government?
Correct. Okay. Alright.
The one thing, having been involved in discussions on
this, and I'm sure we'll hear from the officials on this
shortly, is that there are families who,
or individuals who do, um, shall we say,
um, the, the income is able to be used
to the benefit of others.
I think you'll accept there needs to be an oversight system
to ensure for the protection to remedy, shall
We say? Absolutely. Yeah.
I, I absolutely agree with that. Yeah.
Um, can I
enduring power of attorney?
They don't need audit. Correct.
The difference between that and property manager?
Um, the, the main difference is,
so for my son, he was, he was born, uh, with a condition.
And so when he turns 18, uh, the, the, the family court,
uh, a a point, uh, a person to look
after his, his his property
To, to avoid the situation At all.
Correct. So the enduring power of attorney is, is whereby,
uh, a a a person who's still cognitively capable
to make the decision of
for the person who's gonna represent them when they become,
uh, incapacitated, so to speak.
Right. Because, does that make sense? Sure. Okay.
So the court can only appoint property manager,
it can't appoint an EPOA, my understanding?
I think that's correct. Yeah. And okay.
And, and, and, and in,
and in your case, there's no way
that you can be designated an EPA No, no, definitely not.
But also it's the systems designed to survive you in your,
um, and Jack's mother too, isn't it?
That it's a lifetime of him, not a lifetime of you.
That's right. I think would be, again,
I'm anticipating probably what we may hear back a little,
I know this is, this is an ongoing conversation
among those in the disability community. I know.
Yes. But look, thank you very much.
I mean, we'll just have to, um, we'll keep moving here.
Well, well, and remain, um, and we'll hear from the ISTs.
Thank you. Thank you. No, thank you. And, and good luck.
Thank you. So how old is Jack now? Uh, he's 20 now.
20 now. Yes.
Still the, uh, sorry, excuse if I'm sort of injecting my,
but I, uh, I can, I can feel your pain.
Um, minister of Justice, please. Mm,
Good Afternoon. Good
afternoon. Again, again to see you back here.
So, um, yeah, so, um, we will read your submission,
but speak to them.
Please be, um, great.
Certainly. I'm Caroline Grainy.
I'm, uh, deputy Secretary, uh, policy at Justice
and, uh, my colleague Carl Rafer,
who's the Chief Operating Officer.
Um, thank you for, uh, inviting us today.
And I just wanted to acknowledge, um, Mr. Palmer
and his petition and the, um, issues that he has raised.
Um, uh, I wonder whether it's helpful for us just
to take questions from you, rather, if you've read the, uh,
read the submission, I'm
happy to speak to it if that's helpful.
But I'm, we're also happy just to go through,
It'll be useful just to give you from, from, just
to summarize things from the department's point
of view would be, would be useful.
Okay. Thank you. Um, so as you know,
the petition raises concerns about property orders under
the, um, protection of Personal and Property Rights Act
or the Triple PR Act.
Um, our submission explained there's
two types of property orders.
These are the appointment of a property manager,
which anyone can have.
And the appointment of a property administrator,
which only represented people with lower value, income
and assets eligible for that type
of order is made at the discretion of the court.
Changes made to increase the income
and asset thresholds
for property administration orders in 2024 meant
that more people are now eligible
for property administration orders,
and those ones are the ones that don't have orders.
The petition talks about the cost of financial audits.
This relates to the financial statements
of the represented person that property managers must submit
for auditing by public trust each year.
This function is an important safeguard
as it provides independent scrutiny for represented people
to ensure that court appointed
powers are being used correctly.
It's intended as a protection,
although we expect that most property managers act
conscientiously and appropriately
and in the best interests of the represented person
by nature of their vulnerability.
And the powers provided by orders under the court
represented people are at risk of financial exploitation.
Uh, this is particularly the case
where court orders have limited the person's fundamental
rights and decision making.
The cost of financial audits for property managers is met
by the represented person's estate, which reflects a, a view
that it's for personal benefit, um, that the examination has
for the represented person.
And the policy intent is that is met by the individual.
Property administrators do not require financial audits,
meaning those with lower value estates can
avoid, uh, paying the fees.
This helps ensure different levels of oversight
for represented parties are proportionate to the value, uh,
of property under management
and the associated risk of their property being misused
and reduces the risk that the fees charge exceed the
capability of individuals to pay.
I might just pause there and,
and happy to be happy to take questions,
But don't, as I understand it,
and this is not an area I'm familiar with,
the question is not whether the
risk or should be an ordered.
The question is how, what seems
to be quite extortionate charges are applied,
um, in the se I mean,
$247 an hour is a,
a quite considerable hourly rate anyway,
but when it gets apportioned for every set of six minutes,
that seems quite unreasonable.
So I would quite like to focus not, uh,
on whether there should be an audit or not,
or at what level of property that is required,
but on how we can reign in what seemed to be
unreasonable way of charging.
I think there's, there's probably two things,
and I'll probably speak to one of them
and Kyle might speak to the other
that happened at the same time.
So, um, the first was that, um, if I go back, uh, to the,
to the start of this piece of legislation, which is 1988,
the intention at that point was that, um, the fee was paid
by the protected person.
Over time. What happened is that the, um, uh, amount
of the fee, um, didn't, uh, cover the cost of public trust
and, uh, the crown started subsidizing.
And so for, uh, quite a recent number of years,
there has been a crown subsidy in the mix.
So one of the first things that happened, um, uh,
in 2024 was the removal of the crown subsidy.
And then at the same time, the cost recovery of the,
the amount of the fee for public trust
cost recovery was increased.
And I think it's a combination of those two things together
that is, um, part of this.
Um, and then, I dunno if you wanted to speak to,
But I, I think there's,
there's always been a fee since 1988.
Yeah. Um, it hast increased, it's increased
behind the scenes, but it's been the crown paying for it.
Mm-hmm. It's, uh, a,
a new fee was introduced last year, uh,
which is more reflective.
I mean, public trust might argue
that it doesn't actually cover their full costs at an hourly
rate of, um,
acknowledging what's been said at the table. Sorry,
You're saying that $247 an
hour wouldn't cover their costs?
Uh, they, they might argue that.
I don't know that for sure. Um, so, um,
I know you've got time with public trust in the future.
So, um, I'm not throwing this particular issue.
This is a policy, to be honest.
So here's a fee hasn't moved it for x number of years,
for whatever reasons, and it's been subsidized by the Crown.
Mm. And last year the subsidy dropped out
and the fees increased.
Um, and, and that's, but I think Mr.
Palm's talking about a fee in general, um, yeah.
Rather than whether it's gone
up and how much and whatever else.
Then there is, the, the other thing, to be honest,
I can't answer and we can't answer the charge out
model, the public trust use.
I have a contract with Public Trust to deliver the service.
Um, they charge as a crown owned entity,
it no driven than power companies or whatever else.
Yeah. Um, but I'm happy to raise the,
how they charge in the six minute blocks with them.
Um, but ultimately as a independent entity,
they managed it, how they manage it. Yeah. So
The actual fee for the examinations is set in regulation.
And so that, uh, was a fee that was agreed
by government with public trust.
Um, it's fair to say that those aren't, um, conversations
where we just agree a fee that is, is named, it's a robust,
uh, dis discussion with them about the setting of that fee.
And it is set in regulations. Right.
This is every three years, isn't it?
Well, um, it depends what the, a duration
that the court orders three to five years. Yeah. Yeah.
It's not, It wants to be three to five years.
It's not an annual cost. It is an annual cost.
The order will last three to five years,
and the financial statement has to be, um,
made annually. Yeah, okay.
And it could be not, and it, sorry, I'm just trying
to understand for a relatively, um,
simple property mm-hmm.
Um, the auditing of that management,
was there an estimate done as to how long you would expect
that audit to take?
There would be a question for public trust.
So yeah, we, we, we set the, the hourly races sets. Yeah.
Whether, uh, an order should take 20 minutes or 50 minutes
or three hours that, that's for public trust to, I'm not,
and again, I'm not throwing them, uh,
under the bus in this particular same,
but ultimately they'll get the papers,
they'll order whatever they want to based on the nature
of the estate, uh, and, and the assets of the person.
And it'll take them as long as what it takes 'em to.
Sorry, Simon, you just gonna make a point there. I,
So, um, yeah, it's been noted to two
and four hours for public trust.
Alright. Um, we, we,
You time
and time, so just the, these changes in 2024 mm-hmm.
What, so what was the combined, uh, what was the, um,
the cost, um, to the, um, to the person beforehand?
Oh, that, so the, um, the fee increased from $132 per hour
to $247 27.
Okay. And, but the, the number of hours
Would depend on the, uh, size of the
Estate. So, so Simon,
you might know, what were you,
what were you paying for 2024?
Oh, we started at 20,
we started right in the middle of January.
Oh. Because it, because it didn't come in until,
until Jack turned 18.
Yep. Okay.
It would just be interesting to understand the,
the background there, what changed in terms,
And it would be fair to say many families do organize it
so that there are, the assets are below 25,000.
That's right. And there was a deliberate, uh,
or there was a recognition that the thresholds for where,
um, you in property administration
or property management had not been shifted in quite some
time and were very out of step.
And so that's why those were also shifted,
um, in the same period.
Okay. Thank you very much. Alright, thank you.
Um, we now have, um, CCCS Disability Action.
No. Are they, oh, zoom, sorry, on Zoom.
Can I add one other thing briefly?
Yeah, sure, sure. I just wanna, um, uh,
We're, we are here to find, now this is where,
Um, the Triple PR Act dates back to 1988 mm.
And I'm not sure if you are familiar,
but the law commission's just on a big review of it, um,
which has just been tabled in Parliament.
So I think the other thing that might be interesting
to think about is it's why do you recognize that piece
of legislation, um, needs an overhaul?
Needs an overhaul? Yeah. Uh, uh,
and uh, that's where the law commission got to as well.
So I think lots of the, uh, uh, legal structures
that are set in that, that act, if we were writing
that act today, it probably wouldn't be designed by that.
It is. So I just would so done with Justice
Select committee inquiry or, uh, no.
So it's, it's set with the, it's a law commission report.
Okay. It's, um, being tabled in the house.
And the next step is for, um, the government will
comment on, um, on that report, um, uh,
within the next 90 days.
Yeah.
And, and it's designed for a whole of life, um,
for the individual.
The what? The Law commission, which means
The No, the triple pr, the triple
PR system Logic and
What, and also doesn't take the change in Family
dynamics since that time is
Absolutely Considerably different
Too. The other, the other thing
that I, um, it's a sign,
it's a substantial report.
It's hundreds of pages, so it takes a bit to work through.
But the other thing that it makes the point of saying is,
um, uh, there is a difference in, uh,
in people's mental capacity at the moment.
It's, uh, designed in a very black
and white, either you have capacity where you do not,
and it doesn't recognize the various different, um, degrees
of mental capacity, all that, that's fluid for some people.
So it proposes a much more sophisticated framework.
It, it may well be,
the committee will discuss this afterwards.
It may well be, we decide to bring someone, the author of
that report or the owner of that report to the committee so
that we, um, okay.
Um, working with the full knowledge. So, excellent.
Useful. Thank you. Thank you.
Alright. Sorry. Um, do we have Phoebe?
Yes, I'm here. Hello? Oh, here we go. Sorry.
Hi, sorry. I'm, I'm zooming in from Dunedin,
Right.
Uh, so I am Phoebe. Welcome man.
I'm the National Policy Analyst for CC'S Disability Action.
One of my coworkers, Nathan Bond,
wrote the submission while I was on maternity
leave, but now I'm back.
So I'm fronting, fronting things again.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to present on,
um, Simon's submission.
We are really in support of the submission as a whole
and have significant concerns about what the issues
that were raised in the petition
and the impact that the ACT has on
disabled people and their families.
We believe the act as it stands is very outdated
and also contradicts the United Nation conventions on the
rights of persons with disabilities.
Specifically Article 28, uh, adequate Standard Living
and Social Protection.
Most disabled people
who fall under this act are our most vulnerable
and are unable to work due
to their disabilities or impairments.
Many are recipients of the Supported Living Payment,
which is approximately around 24,000 a year.
So for an individual who earns 24 grand a year,
which isn't much to begin with,
$624 per year
for an audit is a huge expense on top of other living costs
that would have significant impact
on the standard of living.
So we know that over half disabled people,
around 53% live in households where there was not only,
or just enough income to meet PA basic needs
that would go up for people who fall under this act
because they've got, you know, higher access needs.
There's a lot more going on, the costs are gonna be higher.
So it's likely that people who come under the PPR ACT
are enduring financial hardship because of the fees we rec.
Uh, we strongly support recommendations one
and three of the petitioner
and believe that that would ensure that the government's
responsibilities of a sign
as a signatory under the convention would be met
and be of benefit to everybody under the PPR Act.
Uh, I would also like to just touch on safeguarding
and the, the person before me,
and I can't ca I didn't catch her name
and I can't remember her name,
but the person from the law place, Caroline, um, she, yes,
her, she briefly touched on it, um, about safeguarding
and kind of changing of capacity
and how that it's, the law as it stands is really outdated.
It's written from an era where
the solution kind
of was we'll just put disabled people in a corner
and leave them there and it will be fine, which isn't great.
And it's also not appropriate for how we view
and treat disabled people now.
So safeguarding a, uh, the person's interests
and encouraging them to develop an exercise disa supported
decision making and encouraging the competence we are
possible is really, really important
and would be better achieved if the act wasn't
written the way it was.
So if we, if the act was changed
and it recognized fluctuating capabilities
and it recognized the way that we can improve supported,
supported decision making, it would be a lot better
and disabled people who are under this act and were able to,
because we recognize
and acknowledge that not everybody under this,
under this act are going to be able to engage
or, you know, it's, the reality is, is that
for quite a few people are under this act,
they're simply not going to be able
to engage with that level.
So while we recognize that safeguarding is really,
really important, we are concerned that
disabled people's rights are being infringed the way
that it's written currently.
And we believe that it contradicts the United Nation
Convention on convention on the rights of persons
with disabilities, which we're a signatory member of.
Um, so yeah, we want to make it really clear
that we acknowledge the importance of safeguarding.
There are certainly situations where it is appropriate
for disabled people to be protected in
such a way as the audit.
We would, however, like
to see supported decision making being implement,
implemented as and where appropriate moving forward.
It will, however, take significant time
and a lot of work to do that,
to embed those supported decision making processes
within legislation.
Interim steps that should be taken
to predict disabled people's human rights
and to stop disadvantaging them further would be
that disabled people are not responsible
for the cost of the audit.
It's a, it's a significant amount of money for an individual
and their family and farel,
but it's arguably insignificant amount of money
for the government moving forward.
We would like to have discussions around a system
that protects these very vulnerable people whilst uplifting
and involving them where possible about
decisions in their lives.
To do this, we would need to have cross party
and communicate and community engagement to ensure
that we are doing the very best that we can
for the most vulnerable of us all.
And we fully support Simon's submission
and we hope that you consider it.
And I'm happy to take any questions.
Alright, thank you.
No, that's, uh, very, uh, add adds considerably. Yep.
So members, it's no further
questions, so thank you very much.
Welcome. Appreciate it.
And Um, we've got our community law
centers via Zoom too.
Put the on. Alright, so we've got, uh, here we go.
Um,
Mary Maryanne.
Carol. Yeah, Kara. Alright. Thank you very much.
Have you been watching? Have you been online? Oh good.
Yes, I have. Thank you.
I'm sorry. Well look forward to hearing from you.
We've got your submission,
but, uh, obviously, um,
given particularly you've heard the people who have gone
before you, it'd be good to, if you can, um, context
your eyes, your submission accordingly. Sure.
Okay. Thank you ua thank you to the committee
for this opportunity to present
and thanks to Simon, um, Palmer for this petition.
Community law centers frequently advise, um,
and provide community and, um,
education about applications under the Triple PR Act
and the roles under it.
It's sort of the top five in the top five of issues
that our community law centers advise on.
Um, I'm joined by Maryanne Startup from Malborough Community
Law who has seen clients with some of these issues
that we're talking about and she'll
speak to her experiences.
Um, community law centers is the national body
for the community law centers
and supports the this petition, um,
CLCs across the country have reported
that clients have been shocked by, um,
the public trust examination fee invoices,
and they simply can't afford them.
The removal of the subsidy
and increase in the fees is having a real
and negative impact on some
of the most vulnerable people in our community.
The clients that we see, uh,
are disabled being diagnosed with dementia.
Uh, they're being cared for, uh, as by parents,
spouses, other family members.
And the cost of these examination fees is really large
compared to their benefit income.
The original reason for the subsidy,
as I understand it under the Public Trust annual reports,
talks about the funding that Ministry
of Justice is providing in this space
or did provide, is that, um,
and I quote reasons of affordability do not prevent
or preclude vulnerable New Zealanders from
obtaining these key services.
Um, and we are seeing affordability now
as a barrier to these orders.
Some people are, as you know,
other people have talked about trying to work it so they get
underneath this, this threshold.
Um, and that's really concerning.
Um, some of these, some
of the subject people receiving these invoices, um,
actually now qualify as a result of the lower, as a result
of the lifting of those thresholds for,
um, property management orders.
Um, they would now actually, um, qualify
for property administration, which means they wouldn't have
to have their, um, accounts examined
and they wouldn't have to pay public
trust examination requirements.
And, um, at this stage though,
because they are still under property management orders, um,
they have to pay these invoices.
Um, but they weren't given an opportunity to transition
to the different kind of order before this regime came in.
And Public Trust actually
advised Ministry of Justice on this.
They told the Ministry of Justice, this is gonna cost people
who don't have much money, this is gonna
be a big problem for them.
And secondly, there should be a way of transitioning, um,
people into these other kinds of orders
where they don't need, where they now under this
new threshold that didn't happen.
And I'm sure in public trust will
will probably speak to that.
Um, but even
where a subject person now has assets over the new
threshold, um, paying these fees is causing hardship
and could do so for many years.
I speak in our submission about, um,
one community law center that's aware of a case
where the subject person's Kiwi gave a balance,
sits over the new actual threshold asset threshold of 25,000
because their family was putting money aside so
that they could be cared for in their later years.
And now that person is getting, has to pay out
of their welfare benefit
because they're over this threshold.
And that's some, that's a burden that a financial burden
that the subject person is gonna have
to carry potentially for decades.
They don't get access to KiwiSaver
for at least another 20 years or so.
Um, so there's, there's all kinds
of different complex ways in which this in fact situation in
which this issue arises.
So our recommendation is that there should be a subsidy
or some sort of funding for these examination fees
to cover all people, and particularly people, um,
under property management orders who are on benefits.
Um, you know, they might have, uh, a house sitting there
as an older person or they might have, uh,
they like the person I talked about who's younger
and they are on a, on a social welfare, um, benefit
for their day-to-day living and 500 to a thousand dollars.
We've seen a thousands, we've seen a, a fee of a thousand.
You know, this is not small money.
So our recommendation is that if there is, if there has
to be some, if, if the subsidy's not gonna be reintroduced
or there's not gonna be any funding, then the people
who are now under
that threshold should at least have theirs waived
and have some sort of way of transitioning
through the Ministry of Justice and the public trust.
There must be a way of transitioning these people if they
want to be to a property property administration order so
that they don't have to bear this cost.
Um, I really, um, am pleased that the Ministry
of Justice brought up the Law Commission's report
on adult decision making.
Uh, it highlights that most, if not all people
that are subject to these orders are just, oh,
they say most if not all people are sub,
that are subject under these orders are disabled.
And that charging fees for recovering the cost
of reviewing court appointed representative records
may treat people who are subject
to such orders differently from others based on disability.
And I've seen, um, others refer to this as a disability tax.
I really encourage, um, the, um, petitions committee
and CLCA, uh, recommends
that the petitions committee get advice about the possible
discrimination and bill of rights implications of the way
that this is now working, um, that this new system
of requiring people to pay.
So, um, I'm gonna hand over to Maryanne now.
Thanks to Maryanne for joining us.
She's just gonna talk through, um, a couple
of scenarios that she's seen.
Thanks Karen. Well welcome Maryanne.
Thanks for the invitation to speak.
It's, um, great to be able
to talk on a topic that is very passionate.
To me it's the majority of my work is working with people
or organizations trying to navigate the legal systems, uh,
when someone's lost capacity or,
or already has lost capacity.
And then also in the enduring power
of attorney area as well.
So I know both sides, uh, when it comes to capacity issues.
Um, so yeah, daily I see people
who can't see a private lawyer, they don't have the ability
to navigate those systems.
Um, they're often highly stressed when they come to see me
and very overwhelmed.
Um, so, but what's happened now is on top of navigating
that system, when you tell 'em that there is a fee
that it will be applied, uh, for audit purposes,
we are getting people actually refusing
to apply for those orders.
Um, last week I was contacted by an organization
that has the elder abuse contract
and she said, how do I make submissions on this
because I'm now getting people, um, that are refusing
solely on the basis of that fee.
Uh, and I said, well, funnily enough,
I'm having a chat next week, so, um,
I'll raise your issue as well.
Um, so she's saying that basically they can get nobody
to apply now for orders in this elder abuse contract area,
which is really concerning, um,
because you've got already got vulnerable people there.
Uh, and now, you know,
in some cases they're left unprotected,
they obviously don't have powers of attorney.
Uh, and now they can't get court orders
because no one's actually applying for them.
Um, so they then, then, you know,
potentially they're unmonitored as well.
You end up potentially
with people bed blocking stuck in hospitals as well.
Admittedly, some family members have been reluctant anyway
to apply for orders, but this just adds to that level, uh,
of reluctance to apply.
Um, so yeah, for cases for me on the ground,
I've seen couples in, in the family home
or, um, in some instances the family caravan
because that's where they live
and one person's gone into care, so the person left behind
in the home or the caravan's paying for often the mortgage,
still the rates insurance all on their sole pension.
Um, or in one case I've got one woman
that she's working 60 hours a week, so she's paying
for her costs and then her partner's in care
and his, uh, pension has been reduced down to $56 a week.
So that $56 a week from that, if you take your audit fees
and it comes up to a thousand dollars in a year,
that's almost $20 a week effectively from his $56
is going to cover off an audit fee.
So almost a third of his income.
Um, and,
and one other case, I've got a client owns the home
with the spouse that lives here
and has $11,000 in the bank, still has to be audited.
Uh, and you know, that could be 10% of
that bank account effectively coming down five
to 10% per year just on audit fees alone.
So yeah, I'm, I'm seeing it, um, every day people come in
and talk about issues around, um, people
that have lost capacity or I'm going out
and seeing them, um, at their homes, uh, or at the hospice
or in hospitals as well.
So I, I do see this daily problems.
Um, so yeah, I mean ideally if there could be an exemption
for these fees for people that, um,
would meet the property administration threshold
or even those that have fixed assets.
So a little bit like your residential care subsidy.
So if you have your home
and your spouses living in it
really should you be paying these sorts of fees, um,
when you've only got $63 a week to pay for it.
Um, so if there was a fixed assets like the home, uh,
or for under 60 fives, a Kiwi saver, you know,
that they can't access, um, or if they've got money
and prepaid funeral plans like the rest home subsidy
thresholds, then um, you know,
they don't really have the ability to pay pay these funds.
So, um, yeah, it would be good
to see some movement here on these funds
and really welcome this petition, uh,
that Mr. Palmer has made.
Thank you. I'm not sure if we've got time for questions,
but we'd be very happy to answer any Yeah,
We've got time for a couple quick questions.
Uh, yeah, thank you.
Thank you very much for, um, this, I'm just, so just
as we draw this, um, hearing to close, I just want
to be sure we we're, um,
and the, the, the essential issue if I,
if I've heard you guys
and anyone else, right, is that the, uh, the request is
that people not be charged personally
for the audit cost, correct?
Correct. Okay.
And, and, and if it has to be there, there needs to be some,
some way of stepping, like
not have it either everybody doesn't have to pay for these,
um, or there's some way of excluding certain people.
Gotcha. Okay. Is, is there, um, is there any, um,
reporting on the incidents of, uh, of, um,
um, of, of abuse and exploitation?
In other words is, are we absolutely sure
that the audit is required?
The audit is statutorily required,
the public trust under the Triple
P? Oh yeah. No, no, I'm not, I mean,
legally it's required.
I'm just meaning we're, we're, if we're asking for a review
of how it's paid, paid, uh, should we also be reviewing
whether it's actually required?
I I would say a hundred percent it is required.
I have organizations again with elder abuse contracts
that say, um, you know, people are needing to be checked
and balanced on what they're doing.
Um, most people are, are very well-meaning
and no problem at all,
but there are definitely problems out there, um, with, um,
use of funds or an abuse of funds.
Um, but that's not just across, um,
property management orders, but enduring powers attorney,
there's a lot of that going unchecked.
Um, and a really,
But sorry, but, but,
but Enduring Power's attorney are
not required to be opposite.
Correct? That's, that's correct.
There's a huge problem in that area. That's not
The, sorry, so we're just adding another one.
So you're saying that you'd, this isn't part of Simon's, um,
Oh, that's separate.
That's correct. But, But you would like to see auditing
of during powers of attorney as well.
So that'll be yet another cost.
It it is an area
where there is a significant issues. So you can apply
This for things for those, Yeah.
It's not this petition, but it is flagging it for people
that are incapacitated.
Uh, the people that have the use of their funds need
to have a check and balance in place.
And audit obviously is what is required for managers.
I I, I think we could broaden this out
because I mean, the bottom line with this is that, you know,
whenever I've been in discussions, there are, there is a lot
of abuse in this area
and potential for abuse, you'll say, um,
be kinder than saying abuse.
But, um, really once people lose capacity,
and you know what, having someone like Jack at his stage is
slightly different from someone who's been a lot of it
with someone who's been fully, has lost capacity
but have got quite a few assets.
Um, is, and trying to fit those two scenarios into the same
situation where, you know, Jack's, um, is quite different
to someone who's possibly, you know, got,
has got generally a lot of assets, um,
and no capability managing them.
Yeah. So look, we'll have to keep moving,
but look, this is, we will hear more
and look, we'll get, we'll get, um, someone
to report on the, uh, report on the whole
and it may all be our, our recommendations
as a committee might be broader than that.
Um, so look, thank you very much.
Um, and uh, is, is Jack, um, is he verbal?
Is he, uh, nonverbal?
Yeah, so this is the other thing is that these,
that they will never be able to in a position
to articulate the issues themselves. So there's
Probably a number of people that are quite voiceless that
For sure. Yeah, I I,
I know.
So, so this is why it's such an important area. Mm-hmm.
You know, that there will always need to be a voice
for Jack and for my son.
So those voices do need, there needs to be,
and it's interesting, you know, that you definitely,
there does need to be an audit.
That's a very,
The law commission's report does say that, you know,
they still say there should be, uh,
completely agree with the previous submitter.
There, there's a lot of work that needs to be done
and the Law Commission recommends that.
But also that there are these occasions
where we do need these,
where we do need these orders. Yeah.
Alright, look, thank you very much, um,
really appreciate your time this afternoon.
Thank you. Um, and um, yes, look, thank you.
We'll, we'll what we'll do when we are, um,
we'll probably get maybe either written submissions
or from other organizations on this as we broaden it.
We'll need to discuss and agree that afterwards
and, uh, if you, if we do do another hearing on this,
she'll let you know so you can join, um,
so you can hear some of us.
Alright. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.